1
Last Updated: Jan. 12 2026
Creator Platform License Agreement
In addition to Rockstar’s Terms of Service (“Rockstar TOS”) and Community Guidelines, both of which are 
incorporated herein by reference, the following additional terms of this Creator Platform License Agreement 
(“Creator PLA”) apply to your use of the Creator Services (defined below). 
Together, the Rockstar TOS, Community Guidelines, and this Creator PLA form a legally binding agreement 
(“Agreement”) between you and Rockstar Games, Inc., its parent Take-Two Interactive Software, Inc., subsidiaries, 
and affiliates (“Rockstar,” “we,” “us,” and “our”). It is important that you carefully read and understand each of 
these documents before using the Creator Services. If you don’t accept the Agreement, you may not access or 
use any of the Creator Services described below. 
In addition to the Agreement, we also publish a Privacy Policy, which explains how we collect and use your 
personal information. 
THE CREATOR SERVICES ARE PART OF OUR SERVICES (AS DEFINED IN THE ROCKSTAR TOS) AND ARE SUBJECT TO
LIABILITY LIMITATIONS, WARRANTY DISCLAIMERS, AND THE GOVERNING LAW AND JURISDICTION PROVISIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE ROCKSTAR TOS, INCLUDING THE MANDATORY ARBITRATION CLAUSE AND WAIVER OF CLASS 
ACTION AND JURY TRIAL RIGHTS FOR ALL USERS RESIDING IN THE UNITED STATES AND ANY TERRITORY OTHER 
THAN AUSTRALIA, SWITZERLAND, THE UNITED KINGDOM, OR THE TERRITORIES OF THE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC 
AREA. PLEASE SEE SECTION 17 OF THE ROCKSTAR TOS FOR MORE INFORMATION. 
Capitalized terms not defined in this Creator PLA have the same definition as in the Rockstar TOS. Any matters 
not expressly dealt with in this Creator PLA shall be subject to the Rockstar TOS. In the event of an actual conflict 
between this Creator PLA and the Rockstar TOS related to the Creator Services, this Creator PLA will govern. 
1. Scope of Services; Definitions. 
1.1. Creator Services. Subject to and conditioned on your full compliance with the Agreement, Rockstar may 
offer to provide certain software, products, services, and websites that enable access to, and the creation, 
distribution, and operation of, customized or modified versions of certain of our games and game assets, including 
the software platforms commonly known as “FiveM” and “RedM” (collectively, the “Creator Services”). The 
Creator Services include the Operator Services and Player Services defined below. For more information about 
the Creator Services, please visit Rockstar’s websites including www.fivem.net and www.redm.net (the 
“Websites”). Rockstar may use one or more designated ecommerce platform providers, payment processors and 
other applicable third-party service providers (together, the “Operator”) to facilitate the operation of the Creator 
Services and distribution of related content and payments. 
1.2. Covered Games. To use the Creator Services, you must hold a valid entitlement to, or purchase a valid 
retail copy of, one of Rockstar’s games that is authorized for use with the Creator Services (a “Covered Game”). 
You may be required to create an Account and to update the Covered Games to access the Creator Services 
(“Update”). Updates may be automatically downloaded onto the device you use to access the Creator Services. 
Rockstar is not required to provide you with a copy of a Covered Game or to document changes in any Update.
1.3. Creator Policies. In addition to complying with the terms of the Agreement, including the Rockstar TOS
and the Community Guidelines, your right to access and use the Creator Services is conditioned on compliance 
with such relevant policies as Rockstar may provide to you from time to time, including the Rockstar PC SinglePlayer Mods Policy, and the Rockstar Roleplay Server Policy (together the “Creator Policies”). 
1.4. “Operator Services” include software, products, services, and websites that Rockstar and Operator may 
offer that enable the creation and operation of an online server that operates a customized or modified version 
of one of Rockstar’s games or game modes, including any Server Content (defined below) (“Custom Server”). A 
“Server Admin” is a user who operates or assists in the operation or administration of a Custom Server. “Server 
Content” includes all UGC and Custom Content that Rockstar may enable users to create, upload, or distribute via 
the Operator Services. 
1.5. “Player Services” include software, products, services, and websites that Rockstar may offer that enable 
users to search for, access, communicate through, interact with, or share Player Content (defined below) via, a 
Custom Server. “Player Content” includes all UGC and Custom Content that Rockstar may enable users to create, 
upload, or distribute via the Player Services.
1.6. Creator Content. Server Content and Player Content are each examples of UGC or Custom Content 
described in the Rockstar TOS. For the purposes of this Creator PLA, Server Content and Player Content are 
individually and collectively referred to as “Creator Content.” For clarity, all Creator Content is subject to the terms 
of the Agreement including, without limitation, provisions in the Rockstar TOS regarding User Generated and 
Custom Content, and User Rules.
2. Limited License to Use Creator Services. 
2.1. Grant. Subject to your compliance with the terms of the Agreement and Creator Policies, Rockstar grants 
you a limited, non-exclusive, non-transferable, non-sublicensable, revocable license to access and use the Creator 
Services on compatible devices that you own or control. 
2.2. Restrictions. In addition to applicable restrictions in the Rockstar TOS, nothing in this Creator PLA permits 
the use of, and you are hereby prohibited from using, the Creator Services, Covered Games or any of the elements 
thereof in any manner that: (1) violates the rights of any third party, any applicable law, rule, regulation, or the 
Agreement; or (2) constitutes use as a brand, logo, or source identifier for goods or services in commerce. Nothing 
in this Creator PLA grants you any right to use, reproduce, copy, adapt, edit, modify, distribute, perform, display, 
publish, broadcast, transmit, translate, create derivative works based on, or otherwise exploit the Covered Games 
via the Creator Services other than as expressly permitted by Rockstar. 
2.3. No Sponsorship or Endorsement. Rockstar operates the only “official” versions of the Covered Games. 
While the creation and operation of Custom Servers is authorized subject to the terms of the Agreement, nothing 
in the Agreement means that Rockstar approves, sponsors, or endorses any individual Custom Server. Nothing 
herein grants you the right to implicitly or explicitly promote that any aspect of your use of the Creator Services, 
including your Creator Content or Custom Server, is “official” or in any way sponsored or endorsed by Rockstar. 
You must not use any elements of the Covered Games or Rockstar’s logos, trademarks, or other intellectual 
property in any manner that suggests that a Custom Server is approved, sponsored, or endorsed by Rockstar. 
Without limiting the foregoing, you may not use such elements or intellectual property as part of the name or 
branding associated with a Custom Server. All websites, product listings, storefronts, or other user-facing 
information related to a Custom Server must: (1) clearly and conspicuously identify and provide a valid email 
contact for the individual(s) or entity that operates such Custom Server; and (2) include a clear and conspicuous 
disclaimer substantially similar to: “[CUSTOM SERVER NAME] IS NOT APPROVED, SPONSORED, OR ENDORSED BY 
ROCKSTAR GAMES.” 
2.4. Limitation on Musical Works and Modification of Voiceover Performances. You agree that you will not 
use the Creator Services to create, upload, or distribute any musical work or sample thereof that is subject to 
license by a third party including, without limitation, any performing rights organization such as the American 
Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers (ASCAP), Broadcast Music, Inc. (BMI), SESAC or any similar 
international organization responsible for the licensing of musical sound recordings or compositions. For clarity, 
from time-to-time Rockstar may incorporate third party musical works into a Covered Game, but nothing in the 
Agreement gives you the right to publicly perform, communicate to the public, copy, distribute, sample, remix, or 
otherwise modify or exploit such musical works as part of your use of the Creator Services. You agree that you 
will not use the Creator Services to create, upload, or distribute any Creator Content that includes modifications 
or alterations to any voice recording, voiceover performance, or element thereof contained in a Covered Game. 
2.5. Reservation of Rights. All rights not expressly granted in this Creator PLA are reserved to Rockstar. 
Nothing in this Creator PLA grants you any rights in or to Rockstar’s trademarks, trade names, or trade dress, all 
of which are expressly reserved to Rockstar. Any trademark rights in any elements created in breach of this 
Creator PLA that you purport to acquire, together with associated goodwill, shall automatically, immediately, and 
at your expense be assigned to us. You acknowledge and agree that, as between you and Rockstar, we own all 
copyrights, interest, and title to the Covered Games, the elements thereof, and any derivative works based 
thereon including, without limitation, Creator Content except to the extent you hold any separate intellectual 
property rights under applicable law in any Creator Content that you create. 
3. Commercial Exploitation. 
3.1. Prohibited Methods. The license granted to you under this Creator PLA is limited and its scope excludes 
the right to engage in certain types of commercial exploitation, including those listed below. You may not 
commercially exploit the rights granted under this Creator PLA, your Creator Content, or Custom Server through 
any of the following methods: 
(1) any mechanic that allows a user to pay or transfer real-world monetary value including fiat currency, 
assets, crypto currency, or crypto assets (collectively “Real Money”) to the Custom Server and 
subsequently receive, exchange, or transfer Real Money or its equivalent value to other users (“Cash 
Out”), including Real Money gambling of any kind (slot machines, blackjack, poker, or similar casino 
games);
(2) offering or selling for Real Money or in-game virtual currency any “loot boxes,” “gacha” elements, 
random drawings, or sweepstakes, or functionally similar chance-based features or mechanics; 
(3) offering or selling in-game virtual currency for Real Money;
(4) offering, selling, or facilitating access to Virtual Items (as defined in Section 4 of the Rockstar TOS) 
created by Rockstar; 
(5) operating a Custom Server by, on behalf of, or in an ongoing commercial association with, a thirdparty brand (e.g. the “official” server of a brand or other sponsor); 
(6) operating a website, digital storefront, marketplace, or other means through which Server Content 
created by a third party (i.e. someone other than you) is aggregated and sold or licensed to Server 
Admins for Real Money;
(7) creating, uploading, or distributing Creator Content that incorporates third-party promotions, 
advertisements, endorsements, or sponsorships, either in-game within a Custom Server or as 
Marketplace Content (defined below); and 
(8) facilitating the use, sale, or promotion of cryptocurrencies or crypto assets (e.g. “NFTs,” “tokens” or 
“meme coins”). 
This list is not exhaustive; we reserve the right to modify or amend the list at any time and to suspend or prohibit 
commercial exploitation of the Creator Services or any Custom Server for any reason in our sole discretion. You 
may not engage in any prohibited commercial exploitation of the Creator Services unless subject to separate, 
express written terms agreed upon by Rockstar permitting such conduct. 
3.2. Policy and Legal Compliance. You expressly acknowledge and agree that if you engage in commercial 
exploitation of the Creator Service, you are solely responsible for complying with all Rockstar policies as well as all 
laws, rules, and regulations applicable to in such commercial exploitation including, without limitation, those 
related to consumer protection, advertising and promotion, digital sales and e-commerce, collection of taxes, the 
offering of subscription services (if any), and the processing, protection, and privacy of customer personal data. 
4. Responsibility for Server Content. If you use the Operator Services, including to act as a Server Admin for 
any Custom Server, you are responsible for: (1) any Server Content that you or others create, upload, or distribute 
through such Custom Server; (2) ensuring such Custom Server complies with the Agreement and the Creator 
Policies; and (3) ensuring that the Custom Server complies with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations, including 
without limitation, those related to the processing, protection, and privacy of personal data. We reserve the right 
to take Adverse Action against any Server Admin or Custom Server for failure to comply with the terms of the 
Agreement and the Creator Policies. 
5. Third Party Interactions
5.1. No Responsibility for Third Party Content. You understand that by using the Creator Services, you may 
access or interact with Third Party Services, Creator Content, Custom Servers, and other content created by third 
parties (“Third Party Content”). To the fullest extent allowed by applicable law, your use of the Creator Services, 
including Creator Content, Custom Servers, or any Third Party Content is at your own risk; Rockstar is not 
responsible for actively monitoring Third Party Content, nor for any loss, damage, or unsatisfactory performance 
related to your interactions with such Third Party Content. 
5.2. Authorized & Promoted Services; Unauthorized Service Providers. Rockstar may identify certain third 
party service providers (including without limitation e-commerce, payment processor, server hosting, mod or 
asset marketplace, or gameplay video distribution platforms) as being either authorized or exclusive service 
providers for the Creator Service (“Authorized Service”). Rockstar reserves the right to require you to use an 
Authorized Service in connection with specific aspects of the Creator Service. From time to time, Rockstar may 
feature or promote a Third Party Service through the Creator Services (a “Promoted Service”). If you decide to 
engage in a transaction with an Authorized Service or Promoted Service, Rockstar is not a party to your 
transaction, nor will we be liable for any damages you may suffer as a result of your interaction with such 
Authorized Service or Promoted Service. Rockstar may identify certain third-party service providers as being 
unauthorized service providers (“Unauthorized Service Provider”). Rockstar reserves the right to prohibit your 
use of any Unauthorized Service Provider in connection with the Creator Service. The designation of Authorized 
Services and Unauthorized Service Providers is subject to change at any time, for any reason, in our sole discretion. 
Unless otherwise specified, any such changes to the list of Authorized Services and Unauthorized Service Providers 
will become effective thirty (30) days after being posted. For more information about Authorized Services and 
Unauthorized Service Providers, please see our Websites. 
5.3. Additional Terms. Your use of any Third Party Content (including any products or services provided by 
Authorized Services or Promoted Services) may be conditioned on your acceptance of additional terms and 
conditions offered by such third parties. However, any such third-party terms or conditions do not override or 
modify your obligation to comply with this Creator PLA or the Agreement as a whole. You understand and agree 
that Rockstar is not responsible for your interactions with such third parties or the content of any such third-party 
terms, including without limitation the enforcement of such terms or notifying you regarding updates to such 
terms. 
6. Marketplace
6.1. Definitions. As part of the Creator Services, Rockstar may provide one or more marketplaces (each a 
“Marketplace”) through which Rockstar and Operator enables Server Admins to purchase or acquire for 
incorporation in their respective Custom Servers certain Server Content (“Marketplace Content”) that has been 
made available in the marketplace by “Marketplace Creators,” subject to the license terms herein, which license 
includes any rights that Marketplace Creator may hold in such Marketplace Content (“Creator Rights”). 
6.2. Marketplace Transactions. By using the Marketplace as a Server Admin, you acknowledge and agree
that: (1) Rockstar and Operator together act as agent for Marketplace Creators for the purposes of marketing, 
distributing and concluding licensing transactions related to Marketplace Content; (2) as between you on one 
hand and Rockstar and Operator on the other, Rockstar’s and Operator’s roles are limited to operation of the 
Marketplace, collection of payment, concluding licensing transactions related to Marketplace Content and 
delivery of Marketplace Content via the Creator Service; (3) if you enter a transaction via the Marketplace with 
respect to any Marketplace Content you agree to be bound by the terms of this Section 6, including with respect 
to any Creator Rights of each item of Marketplace Content; and (4) the relevant Marketplace Creator is 
responsible for providing reasonable and customary technical support for Marketplace Content, and Rockstar 
and Operator are responsible for providing customer support related to issues arising from the operation of the 
Website or Marketplace, and issues related to transaction or payment processing.
6.3. Marketplace Content License Grant. You acknowledge that any Rockstar-owned elements of 
Marketplace Content constitute Creator Services and thus are licensed to you by Rockstar including, without 
limitation, under Section 2 of this Creator PLA. Without limiting the foregoing, subject to and conditioned on 
your compliance with the terms of this Agreement, when you enter a transaction via the Marketplace to license 
Marketplace Content, the relevant Marketplace Creator grants you a limited, non-exclusive, non-transferable, 
royalty-free, worldwide, perpetual license to Creator Rights in the Marketplace Content, if any, solely to:
(1) incorporate the Marketplace Content into one or more Custom Servers for which you act as 
Server Admin and hold a corresponding server key;
(2) reproduce, publicly perform, display, transmit, and distribute the Marketplace Content only as 
incorporated into your Custom Server and in connection with your use of the Creator Services and
your players’ use of the Player Services on such Custom Server;
(3) commercially exploit the Marketplace Content as part of your Custom Server as permitted under 
this Creator PLA; and
(4) modify the Marketplace Content solely to the extent required to exercise the rights granted in 
this Section 6.3.
If you enter a transaction for Marketplace Content that is (i) licensed on a one-time fee basis, then any license 
granted to you under this Section is irrevocable; (ii) licensed on a subscription basis, then any license granted 
under this Section shall automatically terminate when you terminate your applicable subscription or when the 
Marketplace Creator ceases offering the applicable subscription, whichever happens first. For clarity, nothing in 
this Section shall limit or modify Rockstar’s rights, including, without limitation, to terminate our license to you 
related to such Marketplace Content, which remains subject to the Availability and Termination provisions of 
the Rockstar TOS and as otherwise provided under this Creator PLA.
6.4. Restrictions. In addition to other relevant limitations under the Creator PLA and the Rockstar TOS, the 
limited licenses granted hereunder do not permit and Server Admins shall not: (1) resell, transfer, share, loan, 
or redistribute the Marketplace Content on a standalone basis outside of a Custom Server, or allow others to do 
the same; (2) disassemble, decompile, reverse-engineer, or create derivative works based on the whole or any 
copyrightable element of the Marketplace Content; (3) modify the Marketplace Content except as permitted 
under Section 6.3; or (4) use Marketplace Content in any manner to develop train, enhance, tune, provide 
source material for, or promote Generative AI tools (as defined in the Rockstar TOS).
7. Creator Service Availability. 
7.1. Service Updates. You acknowledge that Creator Content, Marketplace Content, Custom Servers, and 
Third Party Content may cease functioning at any time for any reason, including without limitation, due to 
Updates, changes to the Covered Games, or changes to any of the Creator Services, Marketplace, Authorized 
Services, or Third Party Content. In addition all other limitations on liability provided under the Rockstar TOS
Rockstar is not liable or responsible to you for any perceived loss or damages that may result from such changes 
or Updates including, without limitation, the loss of or failure to receive a refund of any money you may have 
spent related to any Creator Content, Marketplace Content, Custom Server, or Third Party Content.
7.2. Consequences for Violations. Rockstar reserves the right to take Adverse Action in accordance with the 
Rockstar TOS against any user, Account, Creator Content, Marketplace Content, or Custom Server in the event of 
a breach of this Creator PLA, the Creator Policies, or the Rockstar TOS. Rockstar is not liable or responsible to you 
for any perceived loss or damages that may result from such Adverse Actions including without limitation, the loss 
or failure to receive a refund of any money related to any Creator Content, Marketplace Content, Custom Server, 
or Third Party Content.
7.3. Dependence on Third Party Systems. The availability or operation of any Creator Content, Marketplace
Content, Custom Server, or Third Party Content on the Creator Services may rely on software, programs, networks, 
updates, systems, APIs, protocols, code dependencies, services, or other elements created and operated by third 
parties. Rockstar does not maintain, control, or assume any obligation with respect to the maintenance or 
availability of any Creator Content, Marketplace Content, Custom Server, or Third Party Content on the Creator 
Services. To the extent that we provide links or access to Third Party Content, Custom Servers, Creator Content, 
Marketplace Content, or other resources, we do so only as a convenience. 
7.4. Availability. Without limiting any other provision in this Section, you understand and agree that the 
Creator Services are Services subject to the Rockstar TOS Sections related to Availability, Updates, and Features. 
Further, nothing in this PLA requires Rockstar to operate Marketplaces. Rockstar may temporarily or permanently 
cease providing Marketplaces (or any features thereof) to users generally at its sole discretion, without prior 
notice. 
8. Community Disputes. Rockstar has no obligation to resolve, or support the resolution of, any dispute that 
may arise among individual users of the Creator Services, including without limitation between (1) any user of a 
Custom Server and the relevant Server Admins thereof; or (2) any Marketplace Creator and any third party related 
to any transaction that occurs through a Marketplace.